@page docs_faq Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ)

@anchor toolchain_faq 
# Frequently Asked Questions
- How do I set the ROM's title?
  - Use the @ref makebin `-yn` flag. For example with @ref lcc `-Wm-yn"MYTITLE"` or with @ref makebin directly `-yn "MYTITLE"`. The maximum length is up to 15 characters, but may be shorter.
  - See "0134-0143 - Title" in @ref Pandocs for more details.
  <!-- -->  

@anchor faq_gb_type_header_setting
- How do I set SGB, Color only and Color compatibility in the ROM header?
  - Use the following @ref makebin flags. Prefix them with `-Wm` if using @ref lcc.
    - `-yc` : GameBoy Color compatible
    - `-yC` : GameBoy Color only
    - `-ys` : Super GameBoy compatible
    <!-- -->  

- How do I set the ROM @ref MBC type?
  - See @ref setting_mbc_and_rom_ram_banks
    <!-- -->  

@anchor faq_bank_overflow_errors
- What do these kinds of warnings / errors mean?
  `WARNING: possibly wrote twice at addr 4000 (93->3E)`
  `Warning: Write from one bank spans into the next. 7ff7 -> 8016 (bank 1 -> 2)`

  You may have a overflow in one of your ROM banks. If there is more data allocated to a bank than it can hold it then will spill over into the next bank. The warnings are generated by @ref ihxcheck during conversion of an .ihx file into a ROM file.

  See the section @ref docs_rombanking_mbcs for more details about how banks work and what their size is. You may want to use a tool such as @ref romusage to calculate the amount of free and used space.
    <!-- -->  

- Why is the compiler so slow, or why did it suddenly get much slower?
  - This may happen if you have large initialized arrays declared without the `const` keyword. It's important to use the const keyword for read-only data. See @ref const_gbtd_gbmb and @ref const_array_data
    <!-- -->  

- What flags should be enabled for debugging?
  - You can use the @ref lcc_debug "lcc debug flag"
    <!-- -->  

- Why are 8 bit numbers not printing correctly with printf()?
  - To correctly pass chars/uint8s for printing, they must be explicitly re-cast as such when calling the function. See docs_chars_varargs for more details. 
    <!-- -->  

- How can maps larger than 32x32 tiles be scrolled? & Why is the map wrapping around to the left side when setting a map wider than 32 tiles with set_bkg_data()?
  - The hardware Background map is 32 x 32 tiles. The screen viewport that can be scrolled around that map is 20 x 18 tiles. In order to scroll around within a much larger map, new tiles must be loaded at the edges of the screen viewport in the direction that it is being scrolled. @ref set_bkg_submap can be used to load those rows and columns of tiles from the desired sub-region of the large map.
  - See the "Large Map" example program and @ref set_bkg_submap()
  - Writes that exceed coordinate 31 of the Background tile map on the x or y axis will wrap around to the Left and Top edges.


